
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# MetabolomicsPipeline

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

The purpose of the MetabolomicsPipeline is to provide tools for
additional analysis to complement the metabolomic analysis done by
Metabolon. This package is multi-faceted and can be used as a standard R
package, or, this github project can be cloned to provide a reproducible
pipeline. The github project utilizes the renv package to reproduce
package setting to ensure reproducible results over time. To see a
recommended workflow you can use browseVignettes(“MetabolomicsPipeline”)
to see the MetabolomicsPipeline vignette. The recommended workflow is
described in the image below.

<img src="Workflow.png"/>

Each step of the workflow is found in the Code folder.

1.  Normalization and Standardization
    (NormalizationAndStandardization.R)

- This step is turned off by default since this step is completed by
  Metabolon

- More detail in the Workflow vignett.

2.  Analysis Data Creation (AnalysisDataCreation.R)

3.  Exploratory Analysis (ExploratoryAnalysis.R)

4.  SubpathwayAnalysis (subpathwayAnalysis.R)

5.  Pairwise Comparisons (PairwiseAnalysis)

6.  Boxplots and Lineplots (BoxPlotsAndLinePlots.R)

## Installation of Package

You can install the development version of MetabolomicsPipeline from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("JoelParkerUofA/MetabolomicsPipeline")
```

## Custom Pipeline

If you would like to use this github project as a your own pipeline, you
can clone this project by [installing
git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) and
cloning this project to your preferred directory with:

    git clone https://github.com/JoelParkerUofA/MetabolomicsPipeline.git

Alternatively, you can download the project zip file by clicking the
‘\<\>Code’ button and selecting “Download ZIP”.

## Getting Started

#### Demo Data Set

The MetabolomicsPipeline package has example data contains metaboloic
profiles across several treatment groups and time points of ALS in mice.
To get started, the vignette utilizes the ALS data to demonstrate the
MetabolomicPipeline package function and a potential workflow.

#### Creating You Own Pipeline

After you have cloned the project to your local machine, you can place
you Metabolon data in the UserData folder.

### renv

This pipeline utilizes the
[renv](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html#reproducibility)
package to ensure the R environment is consistent for each run. This
means that all of the required packages and versions for this project
will be automatically installed with renv::restore(). If you are using
this pipeline for the first time, then use renv::restore() prior to
running any of the files. This will install and update package versions
used to generate this pipeline. It should be noted, this pipeline was
generated using R 4.3.1 so if you are using an older version of R, then
it is possible package versions may not be able to be reinstalled due to
dependency issues. If this is the case we recommend to update your R
version to R 4.3.1 or greater.

### Folder Structure within git-hub

To get started, in the Metabolomics pipeline working directory, there
are five folders with the following folder structure:

- UserData
  - Metabolon: Contains the .xlsx file from Metabolon and other files
    related to the metadata.
  - Processed: Contains data processed from this pipeline.
- Code: Contains the .R files of each step of the pipeline.
- Outputs
  - Plots
  - Tables
  - Reports
- renv: This folder is generated by renv to restore package versions.

You should save the .xlsx file from Metabolon and any additional
metadata files to the UserData folder. The main output folder will
contain the plots and tables generated from this pipeline.

## Summary

MetabolomicsPipeline can be utilized as a package or a pipline. If you
are using the pipeline option, you must install the MetabolomicsPipeline
package prior to cloning the github project.
